# CloudWatch
---
- Standard monitoring: 5 minutes
- Detailed monitoring: 1 minutes

- **Dashboards**: Created awesome Dashboards to see what is happening with your AWS environment. Can have graphs from different regions
- **Alarms**: Allow you to set alarm that notify you when partiular threshold are hit
- **Events** cloudwatch events helps you to respond to state change in your AWS resources
- **Logs**: CloudWatch logs helps you to aggregate monitor and store logs.
---
The following concepts are important for your understanding CloudWatch metrics:

- **Namespaces**: a container for CloudWatch metrics. Metrics in different namespaces are isolated from each other so that metrics from different applications are not accidentally aggregated for computing statistics.
- **Metrics**: represents a time ordered set of data points that are published to CloudWatch. It can be thought of as a variable that we need to monitor and the data points are the values of the variable over time. Metrics exist only in the region they are created.
- **Dimensions**: a name or a value pair that uniquely identifies a metric. You can assign a maximum of 10 dimensions to a metric. Dimensions help you design a structure for your statistics plan.
- **Statistics**: are metric data aggregation over time specified by the user. Aggregation are made using the namespace, metric name, dimensions and the data point unit of measure within the time period you specify.
- **Percentiles**: as the name suggests, the percentile indicates the relative standing of a value in a dataset. It helps you get a better understanding of the distribution of your metric data. Percentiles are used to detect anomalies.
- **Alarms**: used to initiate actions on your behalf. An alarm monitors a metric over a specified interval of time, and performs the assigned actions based on the value of the metric relative to a threshold over time.

---
The main components of CloudWatch events are:

- **Events**: generated in four ways. It is represented by small blobs of JSON. They can arise from within AWS when a resource changes it’s state. They can arise when events are generated by API calls and console sign-ins that are delivered to Amazon CloudWatch Events via CloudTrail. Another way is when your own code can generate application-level events and publish them to Amazon CloudWatch Events for processing. The last way is that they can be issued on a scheduled basis, with options for periodic or Cron-style scheduling.
- **Rules**: match incoming events and route them to one or more targets or processing. Rules do not have any order for processing, all the rules matching for a particular event will be processed.
- **Targets**: process events and are specified within the rules. There are four initial target types: built-in, Lambda functions, Kinesis streams, and SNS topics. A single rule can specify multiple targets.

--- 
##### Q: How long can I view my Alarm history?
* Alarm history is available for **14 days**. 

##### Q: What is the difference between CloudWatch Events and AWS CloudTrail?

* CloudWatch Events is a *near real time stream* of system events that describe changes to your AWS resources. With CloudWatch Events, you can define rules to monitor for specific events and perform actions in an automated manner.
* AWS CloudTrail is a service that records API calls for your AWS account and delivers log files containing API calls to your Amazon S3 bucket or a CloudWatch Logs log group.
* With AWS CloudTrail, you can look up API activity history related to creation, deletion and modification of AWS resources and troubleshoot operational or security issues.
